# Basics

## Output

### STDOUT, STDIN, STDERR

Let's start by examining these three terms. They stand for standard output, standard input, and standard error. Most commands
will read from `stdin` and write to `stdout`, sending error messages to `stderr`. A shell in a terminal has `stdout` mapped
to tty, the visible display, so that you can see everything that is streamed to it. You can redirect output using the 
greater-than symbol, `>`. You'll see examples of this throughout these labs. You can redirect `stdin` in a similar way, and
again, there are examples throughout the labs. `Stderr` can be redirected using `2>` (technically, these are output streams, 
and `stderr` is mapped to stream 2, hence that syntax).

Let's try redirection now. You'll already be familiar with the `ls` command, so let's use that for the example. `ls`{{execute}}
lists the contents of the directory to `stdout`. We can execute the command and redirect `stdout` to a file using this command:

```
ls > a.txt
```{{execute}}

This will create (or recreate if it previously exists) the file `a.txt`. Let's see what `a.txt` contains:

```
cat a.txt
```{{execute}}

If you don't want to rewrite the file you're redirecting stdout to, then you can use double greater-than signs (sometimes
called a chevron) to 'append' rather than 'rewrite' a file. For example:

```
echo "\ndone\n" >> a.txt
cat a.txt
```{{execute}}

Note: the `\n` is a new-line character. 

If we look at the results of the cat command, we'll see that it dumped the contents of `a.txt` to `stdout`. Because
that maps to the tty, you'll find the output being sent to the terminal. You'll also see that a line with the word 'done'
was appended to the end of the file `a.txt`. The `>>` append operator was responsible for redicting `stdout` to append
to the end of the file. The `\n` character (it's just one character) created a new line before and after the string. 

We use this technique regularly. For example, in containers it is best practice to log to `stdout` and let the DevOps guys deal with 
them. The alternative for logs it to write them to a file, but this would be a mistake. Writing log messages is correctly
the concern of the developers. Shipping those logs over a network is the concern of DevOps and its easier if the developers
haven't messed it up before the ops guys get to it.  

Let's look at more commands that use `stdout` in even more detail.

#### echo
Let's quickly examine a more formal definition of this command. It can be used to send the string argument to `stdout`. 

```
echo "Welcome to DevOps Bootcamp !!"
```{{execute}}

Because you're executing this in a terminal that captures `stdout` from the shell (`tty` -- the terminal -- is bound to `stdout`)
You'll see the output in the terminal. We can redirect that output to a file using the standard redirect operator `>`.

```
echo "Welcome to DevOps Bootcamp !!" > a.txt
cat a.txt
```{{execute}}

Unlike the earlier example, this has rewritten the exiting file because we did not append to it. So be clear in what you 
want to happen to any file you send `stdout` to (or any other stream). You can remove the existing contents of the file
completely, or you can append (you can prepend too but that's not nearly so simple so I'll leave that as an exercise for you). 

We can redirect error output too. We often redirect that to the null device (`/dev/null`) to discard it. This is really
useful when we're running a script and we don't want to stop on an error. First, let's get in a position to create an error. 
Run the following to remove all your running docker containers, then run it again to ensure that you get an error. We'll
examine the weird syntax in more detail later, but basically it runs the command in the parenthesis and substitutes its 
output for itself.

```
docker rm -f $(docker ps -qa)
```{{execute}}

Maybe you got errors both times, maybe you only got an error the 2nd time. Either way, this particular error can be very
inconvenient in a script. You want to remove all containers, but you get an error if none are running before you remove them.
One way of dealing with this would be to check if there are any running containers before removing them, but this is very
inefficient and not guarenteed to be accurate (can you guess why?). Instead, we just want to run this command and ignore
any errors. This is a 2-step process: first we'll redirect `stderr` to `/dev/null` to silence it, then we'll have to ignore
the command's non-zero output (which is an error in Linux). We ignore the latter by piping the result to `true`, which is 0 
in Linux. The `stderr` output we deal with by redirecting it to the `null` device that swallows all input.
we 

```
docker rm -f $(docker ps -qa) 2> /dev/null | true
```{{execute}}

We follow this pattern throughout the industry, so it's worth doing a lot of background reading on this and to practice 
it a lot.

So far I've not mentioned `stdin`, but it works a lot like `stdout`, but sometimes commands work differently if they are 
operating from `stdin` rather than being given a file to operate on. One example is `wc` which counts words. Hopefully 
you have something in your history by now, so lets use that as an example. Let's start by dumping our history into a file 
with the following command:

```
history > myhistory.txt
```{{execute}} 

Now, let's count how many lines are in that file:

```
wc -l myhistory.txt
```{{execute}}

Notice that the name of the file is output at the end of the counts. This is 'file' mode -- wc reads the file. We can also
run `wc` using `stdin`, where a stream is passed, like so:

```
wc -l < myhistory.txt
```{{execute}}

Here we are redirecting stdin to read the file `myhistory.txt` with the result that we get a count of lines, but notice that 
the filename is no longer listed. That's because `wc` doesn't know about the file and so can't output its name.

## Pipes
There is another pretty common way of redirecting IO (input/output), that we call pipes. Pipes are a type of file (everyting
is a file in linux) that have a source and a sink. The source pumps data (usually strings) into a pipe and a sink recieves
(and hopefully) processes it. You've seen pipes before in your labs and demos. The command to use one is trivial: it's a `|` symbol.
An example is probably in order right now. Let's pipe the output of `cat` (which streams a file to `stdout`) to `wc`, which 
as you know by now simply counts words and lines in a file. We'll have to create a file first, so we'll take the history 
again...

```
history > myhistory.txt
cat myhistory.txt | wc -l
```{{execute}}